HERE TO STAY.
>> Ifill: A BIG WIN FOR
OBAMACARE, AND A BIG DAY AT THE
SUPREME COURT JUSTICES PRESERVE
NATIONWIDE TAX CREDITS FOR
INSURANCE AND PROTECTIONS FOR
FAIR HOUSING.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL,
JUDY IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY,
OVERCOMING TOUGH ODDS AND
RAISING THE BAR, A SEATTLE HIGH
SCHOOL UNDER THREAT OF CLOSURE,
ADOPTS RIGOROUS INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS TO TURN STUDENTS
TOWARDS SUCCESS.
>> THESE KIDS ARE SO SMART AND A
STUDENT CAN READ YOU IF YOU DO
NOT THINK THAT THEY CAN DO
SOMETHING THEY WILL PERFORM TO
YOUR EXPECTATIONS.
>> Ifill: PLUS, MISBEHAVING
MARKETS, HOW TO MAKE SMARTER
ECONOMIC CHOICES IN A COMPLEX
AND IRRATIONAL WORLD.
>> PEOPLE LOVE DEALS.
THEY CAN BE DRIVEN TO PURCHASE
THINGS THAT THEY DON'T REALLY
WANT IF THE DEAL IS GOOD ENOUGH.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: FOR THE SECOND TIME,
THE PRESIDENT'S SIGNATURE HEALTH
CARE PROGRAM HAS SURVIVED A
POTENTIALLY LIFE-OR-DEATH LEGAL
CHALLENGE.
TODAY'S SUPREME COURT DECISION
CREATED WAVES OF RELIEF AT THE
WHITE HOUSE AND BEYOND.
>> ACA IS HERE TO STAY!
>> Ifill: SUPPORTERS OF THE
"AFFORDABLE CARE ACT" ERUPTED IN
CHEERS OUTSIDE THE COURT, AS THE
NEWS REACHED THE MARBLE STEPS.
AN HOUR LATER, PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN STEPPED
INTO THE WHITE HOUSE ROSE GARDEN
TO SAVOR THE VICTORY.
>> THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT THAT
THIS LAW IS WORKING.
IT HAS CHANGED, AND IN SOME
CASES SAVED, AMERICAN LIVES.
IT'S SET THIS COUNTRY ON A
SMARTER, STRONGER COURSE.
AND TODAY, AFTER MORE THAN 50
VOTES IN CONGRESS TO REPEAL OR
WEAKEN THIS LAW, AFTER A
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION BASED IN
PART ON PRESERVING OR REPEALING
THIS LAW, AFTER MULTIPLE
CHALLENGES TO THIS LAW BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT, THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IS HERE TO
STAY.
>> Ifill: THE LAW HAD SURVIVED A
PREVIOUS SUPREME COURT
CHALLENGE.
THIS TIME, OPPONENTS CHALLENGED
THE FEDERAL SUBSIDIES THAT
UNDERPINNED ITS HEALTH COVERAGE,
SPECIFICALLY IN 34 STATES THAT
DID NOT SET UP THEIR OWN
INSURANCE EXCHANGES.
BY SIX TO THREE, THE COURT SAID:
THE SUBSIDIES DO APPLY.
HAD THE DECISION GONE THE OTHER
WAY, MORE THAN SIX MILLION
PEOPLE COULD HAVE LOST THEIR
HEALTH COVERAGE.
CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN ROBERTS TOOK
NOTE OF THAT POTENTIAL, IN HIS
MAJORITY OPINION, SAYING:
BUT JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA'S
DISSENT, READ ALOUD FROM THE
BENCH, WAS SCATHING.
HE SAID, IN PART, "WE SHOULD
START CALLING THIS LAW SCOTUS
CARE," ALLUDING TO THE COURT'S
2012 DECISION TO UPHOLD THE LAW
FOR A DIFFERENT REASON.
THE HIGH COURT ALSO SIDED WITH
CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVISTS IN A
HIGH-PROFILE CHALLENGE TO
HOUSING LAW.
IN A CASE FROM TEXAS, THE
JUSTICES VOTED 5 TO 4 THAT
DISCRIMINATION LAWSUITS CAN BE
BROUGHT EVEN IF THE ACTION WAS
UNINTENTIONAL.
BUT IT WAS THE A.C.A. DECISION
THAT DOMINATED THE DAY.
RON POLLACK OF "FAMILIES USA,"
WHICH FAVORS THE LAW, WAS AT THE
SUPREME COURT ND W AELD THE
OUTCOME.
>> IT MEANS THAT THE MILLIONS OF
CONTINUE TO HAVE HEALTH
INSURANCE.
Ifill: THOSE ON THE LOSING
SIDE LAME THE DECISION.
SAM KAZMAN IS WITH THE
COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE, A MEMBER OF THE
PLAINTIFFS' LEGAL TEAM.
>> TODAY'S RULING IS A TRAGEDY
FOR THE RULE OF LAW IN THIS
COUNTRY.
IN A 6-3 DECISION, THE SUPREME
COURT HAS TWISTED AND
SOMERSAULTED ON TRADITIONAL
RULES OF STATUTORY
INTERPRETATION AND ESSENTIALLY
ALLOWED THE IRS TO REWRITE THE
VERY STATUTE THAT CONGRESS
ENACTED.
>> Ifill: MANY REPUBLICANS,
MEANWHILE, VOWED TO CONTINUE
THEIR EFFORT TO ROLL BACK THE
WHOLE LAW.
>AMACARE IS FUNDAMENTALLY
BROKEN.
IT'S RAISING COSTS FOR PEOPLE,
IT'S PUSHING PEOPLE OUT OF THE
ABILITY TO AFFORD HEALTH
INSURANCE.
AND IT NEEDS TO BE DEALT WITH.
BUT AS WE KNOW, IT'S VERY
DIFFICULT TO DEAL WITH IT WHEN
YOU HAVE A PRESIDENT THAT
FUNDAMENTALLY DISAGREES WITH US.
AND SO THE STRUGGLE WILL
CONTINUE.
>> Ifill: AMONG THOSE VOWING
REPEAL, SEVERAL CANDIDATES NOW
RUNNING TO SUCCEED MR. OBAMA.
>> Ifill: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE
HEALTH CARE AND HOUSING
DECISIONS, AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
STATE LAWMAKERS IN CALIFORNIA
MOVED TODAY TO IMPOSE ONE OF THE
NATION'S STRICTEST VACCINATION
LAWS.
THE STATE ASSEMBLY VOTED TO
REQUIRE THAT NEARLY ALL PUBLIC
SCHOOL CHILDREN GET THEIR SHOTS,
OR BE HOME-SCHOOLED.
THE BILL GAINED MOMENTUM AFTER A
MEASLES OUTBREAK THAT STARTED AT
DISNEYLAND AND KILLED MORE THAN
100 PEOPLE.
CONGRESS HAS COMPLETED WORK ON A
MAJOR TRADE PACKAGE SOUGHT BY
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
THE HOUSE GAVE FINAL APPROVAL
TODAY TO RENEWING A JOB TRAINING
PROGRAM.
IT'S MEANT TO AID AMERICANS WHO
LOSE JOBS TO OVERSEAS
COMPETITION.
THE VOTE CLEARS THE WAY FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION TO RETURN TO
NEGOTIATING AN ASIAN FREE-TRADE
DEAL.
THE DEADLINE FOR FINISHING A
NUCLEAR DEAL WITH IRAN IS
TUESDAY, BUT 18 LEADING NATIONAL
SECURITY FIGURES HAVE THEIR
DOUBTS.
IN AN OPEN LETTER, THEY ARE
PRESSING FOR A TOUGHER LINE ON
INSPECTIONS AND SANCTIONS
RELIEF.
OTHERWISE, THEY SAY, THE TALKS
"MAY FALL SHORT OF THE
ADMINISTRATION'S OWN STANDARD OF
A GOOD AGREEMENT," A WARNING
THAT BROUGHT THIS WHITE HOUSE
RESPONSE.
>> THE LETTER ESSENTIALLY LAYS
OUT THE KIND OF CRITERIA THAT IS
BROADLY CONSISTENT WITH THE
FRAMEWORK THAT WAS ANNOUNCED
BACK IN APRIL AND THE PRESIDENT
WAS CRYSTAL CLEAR THAT THE ONLY
KIND OF FINAL AGREEMENT WE WOULD
REACH IS ONE THAT FULFILLS THE
PRINCIPLES THAT HAVE PREVIOUSLY
BEEN AGREED TO.
>> Ifill: U.S. OFFICIALS
SUGGESTED THE JUNE 30TH DEADLINE
COULD SLIP "BY A SHORT BIT" IF
THAT'S WHAT IT TAKES TO GET A
GOOD AGREEMENT.
GREECE ALSO FACES A LOOMING
DEADLINE, FOR A NEW BAILOUT
DEAL, BUT NEGOTIATIONS APPEAR
STUCK.
EURO-ZONE FINANCE MINISTERS MET
WITH GREEK OFFICIALS IN BRUSSELS
AND ADJOURNED WITHOUT AGREEMENT.
THAT SETS UP A LAST-DITCH EFFORT
ON SATURDAY.
>> THE DOOR IS STILL OPEN FOR
THE GREEK SIDE TO COME WITH NEW
PROPOSALS OR TO ACCEPT WHAT IS
ON THE TABLE.
THE INSTITUTIONS ARE GOING TO
LOOK AT THE LAST PROPOSALS, AS I
SAID.
IF ANYTHING OF THAT IS USEFUL WE
WILL USE IT OF COURSE BUT WE ARE
VERY, ON A NUMBER OF ISSUES,
QUITE FAR APART SO IT IS GOING
TO BE DIFFICULT.
I THINK THAT EUROPEAN HISTORY IS
FULL OF DISAGREEMENTS,
NEGOTIATIONS, AND THEN
COMPROMISES.
SO AFTER THE COMPREHENSIVE GREEK
PROPOSALS, I AM CONFIDENT THAT
WE WILL REACH THE COMPROMISES
THAT WILL HELP EURO ZONE AND
GREECE TO OVERCOME THE CRISIS.
>> Ifill: GREECE'S CREDITORS SAY
THEY NEED AN AGREEMENT BY
MONDAY.
OTHERWISE, THE ATHENS GOVERNMENT
IS LIKELY TO DEFAULT ON A MAJOR
DEBT REPAYMENT.AVE IN SOUTHERN N
HAS NOW KILLED MORE THAN 1,100
PEOPLE, EVEN AS TEMPERATURES
EASE DOWN.
IN KARACHI TODAY, MORGUES RAN
OUT OF SPACE, AND HOSPITALS WERE
STILL STRUGGLING TO HANDLE AN
INFLUX OF PATIENTS WITH
HEAT-RELATED AILMENTS.
VOLUNTEERS TURNED OUT ACROSS THE
CITY, SETTING UP RELIEF CAMPS TO
HAND OUT WATER.
IN SYRIA TODAY, "ISLAMIC STATE"
FIGHTERS STRUCK BACK, AFTER
LOSING GROUND TO KURDISH FORCES
IN RECENT DAYS.
MILITANTS ATTACKED THE KURDISH-
OBANI, ALONG THE
TURKISH BORDER, KILLING AT LEAST
35 PEOPLE.
FOOTAGE SHOT FROM THE TURKISH
SIDE OF THE BORDER SHOWED
DEMOLISHED HOMES, AND THICK
SMOKE RISING FROM BUILDINGS.
SPORADIC FIGHTING CONTINUED
THROUGH THE DAY.
ISIS ATTACKERS ALSO STAGED A
SEPARATE ASSAULT IN NORTHEASTERN
SYRIA.
IN FRANCE, TAXI DRIVERS STAGED A
NATIONWIDE STRIKE TO PROTEST THE
RIDE-HAILING SERVICE UBER.
STRIKERS BLOCKED TRAFFIC,
ATTACKED UBER VEHICLES AND IN
PLACES, EVEN CLASHED WITH POLICE
WEARING RIOT GEAR.
THEY ACCUSED THE RIDE-SHARING
SERVICE OF STEALING THEIR
LIVELIHOOD.
LIVELIHOOD. >> (
translated): UBER, IT'S
>> (translated): UBER,
IT'S ILLEGAL WORK.
ILLEGAL WORK.
IT, YOU CAN'T TELL WHETHER THEY
HAVE A DRIVER'S LICENSE, YOU
KNOW NOTHING ABOUT THEM AND THEY
HAVE NO LICENSE, THEY'RE NOT
TAXIS, THEY'RE NOT
PROFESSIONALS, THEY DON'T HAVE
TRAINING, WE JUST DON'T KNOW WHO
THEY ARE.
THE FRERCHG GOVERNMENT HAS BAND
UBER FROM RUNNING THE LOWEST
COST SERVICE BUT SO FAR WITH NO
SUCCESS.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
ATTORNEYS FOR JAMES HOLMES BEGAN
PRESENTING THEIR CASE IN THE
2012 MOVIE THEATER SHOOTINGS IN
AURORA.
THE ATTACK AT A MIDNIGHT SHOWING
KILLED 12 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED 70
OTHERS.
HOLMES HAS PLEADED NOT GUILTY BY
REASON OF INSANITY.
ANOTHER BIG AUTO RECALL IS IN
THE WORKS.
MITSUBISHI ANNOUNCED TODAY IT'S
CALLING IN 460,000 CARS IN THE
U.S.
IN SOME CASES, WHEN THE AIR BAGS
DEPLOY, THEY CAN JAM THE SUN
VISORS INTO A PASSENGER'S FACE.
FIVE INJURIES HAVE BEEN
REPORTED, AND TWO OF THE VICTIMS
LOST SIGHT IN ONE EYE.
THE MODELS AFFECTED INCLUDE THE
ECLIPSE, AND SOME CHRYSLERS AND
DODGES FROM THE EARLY 2000'S.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST 75
POINTS TO CLOSE AT ,890.
THE NASDAQ FELL TEN POINTS, AND
THE S-AND-P SLIPPED SIX.
AND, SPANISH-LANGUAGE
BROADCASTER UNIVISION IS
DROPPING ALL TIES WITH DONALD
TRUMP, INCLUDING THE MISS U.S.A.
PAGEANT, THAT HE PARTLY OWNS.
THE NETWORK SAID TODAY IT'S
BECAUSE OF REMARKS THAT THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE MADE ABOUT MEXICAN
IMMIGRANTS.
TRUMP SHOT BACK THAT HE MAY SUE
UNIVIION.S
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR;
DIGGING IN TO TODAY'S BIG
DECISIONS FROM THE SUPREME
COURT;
INCLUDING PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HEALTH CARE VICTORY;
AND FIGHTING HOUSING
DISCRIMINATION;
THEN, WHY MORE AMERICAN SCHOOLS
ARE ADOPTING INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS FOR SUCCESS;
AND RETHINKING ECONOMICS, WHY
MARKETS MISBEHAVE WHEN HUMANS
MAKE IRRATIONAL CHOICES.
>> Ifill: NOW TO A MOMENTOUS DAY
AT THE SUPREME COURT.
WE BEGIN OUR COVERAGE WITH THE
LONG-AWAITED RULING ON THE
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW.
MARCIA COYLE OF THE NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL WAS IN COURT AND JOINS
ME NOW.
MARCIA, 6-3, A PRETTY-- A PRETTY
DEFINITE RULING.
WHAT WAS THE RATIONALE FOR THE
COURT?
>> IT WAS A VERY STRAIGHTFORWARD
RULING, AND DONE IN ONLY ABOUT
21 PAGES BY THE CHIEF JUSTICE.
THE CHALLENGE BEFORE THE COURT
WAS TO EXAMINE THE MEANING OF A
PROVISION IN THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT THAT EXPLAINS HOW SUBSIDIES
ARE TO BE USED.
THE PROVISION SAYS THAT
SUBSIDIES ARE AVAILABLE TO
PURCHASES ON EXCHANGES
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE.
THE CHALLENGERS HERE SAID
"ESTABLISHED BY THE THE STATE"
MEANS WHAT IT STAYS-- STATE
EXCHANGES, NOT SUBSIDIES
AVAILABLE ON THE 34 FEDERALLY
CREATED EXCHANGES.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE SAID INITIALLY
THAT WHEN YOU LOOK AT CAN THE
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE "THE
WORDS SEEMED PRETTY PLAIN, BUT
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THAT PHRASE AND
HOW IT'S USED IN OTHER PART OF
THE ACT, ALONG WITH OTHER
PROVISIONS IN THE ACT DEALING
WITH FEDERAL EXCHANGES, IT'S NOT
SO CLEAR.
AND SINCE IT'S NOT SO CLEAR,
YOU'VE GOT TO EXAMINE THE WORDS
IN THEIR CONTEXT, AS WELL AS
WITHIN THE WHOLE STRUCTURE OF
THE STATUTE.
>> Ifill: SO HE WAS RULING ON
THE INTENT OF THE LAW WRITERS AS
OPPOSED TO THE SPECIFIC WORDS,
WHICH JUSTICE SCALIA SAID WAS
TURNING THE WORDS ON THEIR HEAD.
>> HE EXAMINED THE INTENT OF
WHAT CONGRESS DID, BUT HE ALSO
EXPLAINED HOW THE ACT OPERATES,
THAT THESE SUBSIDIES WERE AN
INTEGRAL PART OF THE ACT BEING
WORKABLE.
UNDER THE CHALLENGERS'
INTERPRETATION, HE SAID, THE ACT
WOULD NOT WORK.
IN FACT, IT WOULD SEND INSURANCE
MARKETS INTO A DEATH SPIRAL AND
THAT IS NOT WHAT CONGRESS, HE
SAID, WANTED TO DO HERE.
HE SAID THEY WANTED TO IMPROVE
AND ASSET HEALTH INSURANCE
MARKETS, NOT DESTROY THEM.
AND THE COURT HAS A
RESPONSIBILITY TO PAY ATTENTION,
TO BE SENSITIVE TO THE
LEGISLATIVE PLAN, AND SO IT
ADOPTED THE INTERPRETATION THAT
IT DID BECAUSE OF THAT.
>> Ifill: NOW, THERE ARE SOME
OBSERVERS, I GUESS WE CAN CALL
THEM, WHO WERE SURPRISED AT THIS
AND SURPRISED THAT THE CHIEF
JUSTICE'S DEFINITIVE LANGUAGE,
ESPECIALLY BECAUSE HE ALSO WROTE
THE RULING UPHOLDINGS THE LAST
CHALLENGE TO THE HEALTH CARE
LAW.
>> HE DID.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE DIDN'T SAY
MUCH DURING THE ORAL ARGUMENTS
IN THIS CASE.
HE WAS CONSIDERED POSSIBLE VOTE
TO STRIKE DOWN THE SUBSIDIES BUT
ALSO TO UPHOLD THEM.
AND I THINK HIS VERY
STRAIGHTFORWARD, CLEAR OPINION
MAKES IT VERY CLEAR THAT HE FELT
THIS WAS THE BEST INTERPRETATION
OF THE ACT.
JUSTICE KENNEDY JOINED HIM IN
THE 6-3 MAJORITY.
JUSTICE KENNEDY VOTED IN 2012 TO
INVALIDATE THE ENTIRE ACT
BECAUSE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
COVERAGE REQUIREMENT.
BUT EVEN DURING THE ARGUMENTS IN
THE CURRENT CHALLENGE, JUSTICE
KENNEDY HAD SOME PROBLEMS WITH
WHAT THE CHALLENGERS WERE
SAYING.
SO HE WAS CONSIDERED "GETTABLE"
AS WELL.
>> Ifill: JUSTICE SCALIA USE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO READ HIS VERY
STRONGLY WORDED DISSENT FROM THE
BENCH.
>> YES, HE DID.
HE SUMMARIZED IT FROM THE BENCH,
WHICH IS ALWAYS AN INDICATION
THAT A JUSTICE FEELS VERY
STRONGLY.
AND HE SAID THAT THE WORDS
"ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE"
COULDN'T BE MARINE.
IT MEANS ESTABLISHED BY THE
STATE.
AND HE SAID THAT THE COURT WAS
ENGAGING IN PURE APPLE SAUCE
INTERPRETATION.
HE EVEN SAID, "INTERPRETIVE
JIGGERY POKERY."
>> Ifill: WASN'T THAT A HARRY
POTTER PHRASE?
>> IT ACTUALLY HAS A SCOTTISH
DERIVATION, AND J.K. RAWLINGS
TWEETED ABOUT IT SAYING SHE
STOPPED USING THAT PHRASE
SOMETHING LIKE 20 YEARS AGO.
BUT IT WAS A VERY COLORFUL
DISSENT.
BUT ALSO HE WENT STEP BY STEP
THROUGH THE STATUTE WITH HIS OWN
INTERPRETATION OF HOW THE
PROVISIONS WORKED, AND,
OBVIOUSLY, WAS VERY UNHAPPY.
HE WAS JOINED BY JUSTICES THOMAS
AND JUSTICE ALITO IN HIS
DISSENT.
>> Ifill: I'LL TELL YOU IT
WAS AN INTERESTING BIG DAY AND
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT IT
SOME MORE AND WE'LL GET BACK TO
YOU ON THE NEXT CASE IN A
MOMENT.
>> Ifill: SO IS THAT THE END OF
THE FIGHT?
FOR MORE ON WHAT HAPPENS NEXT,
I'M JOINED BY TWO EXPERTS WHO
HELPED SHAPE THE OFFENSE AND
DEFENSE.
NEERA TANDEN IS PRESIDENT OF THE
CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS.
SHE HELPED WRITE THE HEALTH CARE
LAW.
AND MICHAEL CANNON OF THE CATO
INSTITUTE WAS A LEADING FORCE
BEHIND ITS CHALLENGE.
MICHAEL CANNON, YOU SAY THE
SUPREME COURT WAS INTIMIDATED BY
THIS.
>> WELL, YEAH.
I THINK THERE ARE A COUPLE OF
THINGS THAT ARE IMPORTANT TO
KEEP IN MIND HERE.
ONE OF THEM IT'S NOT JUST
SUBSIDIES THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT.
THERE ARE TAXES THAT ARE TIED TO
THOSE SUBSIDIES THAT ARE BEING
IMPOSED ON 70 MILLION AMERICANS
IN THOSE STATES.
AND HAD THE CHALLENGERS WON
THOSE TAXES WOULD HAVE
DISAPPEARED, TOO.
SO THEY'RE CHALLENGING BOTH THE
TUBS DEES AND TAXES AS ILLEGAL.
ANOTHER IMPORTANT THING TO KEEP
IN MIND IS NINE SUPREME COURT
JUSTICES SAID, ALL NINE SAID,
YOU KNOW WHAT, THE CHALLENGERS
HAVE THE CASE.
THE PLAIN MEANING OF THE STATUTE
HERE DOES DO WHAT THEY SAY EVENT
PLAIN MEANING OF THE OPERATIVE
PART OF THE STATUTE DOES DO WHAT
IT SAYS.
IT DOES MEAN ESTABLISH BY THE
STATE.
BUT THEY THOUGHT THE PURPOSE OF
THE STATUTE WOULD NOT BE SERVED
BY THE WAY CONGRESS WROTE IT,
THEY DECIDE TO REWRITE IT.
>> Ifill: NEERA TANDEN.
>> NO, I DON'T SEE IT THAT WAY
AS WELL.
I THINK JUSTICE ROBERTS AND
KENNEDY, AND THE OTHER THREE
JUSTICE EXPOOZ I WILL NOTE TWO
OF THOSE WERE APPOINTED BY
CONSERVE PRESIDENTS -- HAVE A
VERY STRONGLY WORDED OPINION
WHICH IS VERY DEFINITIVE.
THEY HAD AN OPTION WHICH IS TO
SAY THEY COULD HAVE INTERPRETED
IT IN A WAY THAT WOULD HAVE
ALLOWED A FUTURE PRESIDENT TO
INTERPRET IT DIFFERENTLY. DEFINT
ABOUT CHA THIS LAW WAS INTEND TO
DO, WHAT THIS LANGUAGE MEANS IN
THE STATUTE, AND FOUND THAT THE
PLAINTIFFS WERE WRONG TO GRING
BRING THIS CASE, THAT THEY WERE
WRONG, AND I THINK THE BEST PART
ABOUT THIS IS THE NATURE OF THE
DECISION MAKES IT HARDER TO
BRING FUTURE CLAIMS, ONE THEY--
>> Ifill: THAT WAS MY NEXT
QUESTION.
IS THIS THE END OF THE ROAD?
WE HEARD A LOT-- CLBL JOHN
BOEHNER, ALMOST EVERY REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT CAME OUT
TODAY AND SAID THIS IS NOT THE
END OF THE ROAD.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S THE END OF
THE ROAD FOR THE OPPOSITION TO
THIS JOB.
THE MAJORITY, PLURALITY OF THE
PUBLIC OPPOSES IT AS THEY HAVE
FOR SIX YEARS, AND THIS DECISION
DOESN'T ELIMINATE THE LAW'S HIGH
COST.
IT JUST HIDES THEM.
AND THAT'S YET ADMINISTRATION
FOUGHT THIS CASE SO VIGOROUSLY.
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
NOTE--
>> Ifill: IS THERE ANOTHER
WAY IN, OTHER THAN OUTRIGHT
REPEAL, AFTER THIS KIND OF
RULING?
>> THERE ARE A COUPLE OF CASES
MAKING THEIR WAY THROUGH THE
COURTS RIGHT NOW.
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES HAS
FILED A SUIT WHOSE IMPACT WOULD
BE VERY SIMILAR TO A RULING FOR
THE CHALLENGERS IN "KING VERSUS
BURWELL."
THEY WILL HAVE A DIFFICULT TIME
ESTABLISHING STANDING.
>> IN CASES ARE GETTING DISMISS
PD.
THERE WAS A CASE TODAY THAT GOT
DISMISSED.
LOOK, MY VIEW OF THIS IS THIS IS
THE SECOND TIME THE SUPREME
COURT HAS FOUND IN FAVOR OF THE
GOVERNMENT, AND, YOU KNOW, WE
ARE NOW SPENDING A LOT OF
RESOURCES, FEDERAL RESOURCES, TO
KEEP RE-LITIGATING THIS ISSUE.
PEOPLE HAD TO DEFEND THIS CASE.
AT SOME POINT, I THINK THE VAST
MAJORITY OF AMERICANS WOULD LIKE
TO MOVE ON FROM THIS DEBATE.
THIS ISN'T ABOUT IMPROVING THE
LAW OR MAIXING FIXES.
THIS EFFORT IS REALLY TO UNDO
THE LAW AND AT SOME POINT WE
HAVE TO MOVE ON.
>> Ifill: BUT THERE ARE A LOT
OF GOVERNORS WHO ARE STILL
RESISTANT TO THIS AND WHO WERE
FIGHTING MEDICAID EXPANSION,
FIGHTING ALL KIND OF BITS OF
THIS LAW.
HOW CAN YOU SAY MOVE ON WHEN THE
DEBATE IS STILL GOING ON?
>> ACTUALLY WHAT, HAS BEEN
DR. TRING-- PEOPLE SHOULD DEBATE
THE LAW.
BUT WHAT'S INTERESTING ABOUT THE
LAST COUPLE OF YEARS IS WE HAVE
SEEN REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS IN
STATES LIKE MICHIGAN, ET CETERA,
OHIO-- JOHN KASICH IS RUNNING
FOR PRESIDENT AND HE'S ACTUALLY
TALKING ABOUT HIS MEDICAID
EXPANSION GLSM BUT NOT IN
FLORIDA OR INDIANA OR 30 OTHER
STATES.
>> THERE ARE DEBATES.
GOVERNORS ARE TRYING TO PUSH IN
STATES LIKE INDIANA.
DISCUSSIONS ARE HAPPENING IN
CONSERVATIVE STATES.
THAT IS ON THE MEDICAID
EXPANSION ITSELF NORTH ON THE
EXCHANGES.
BUT I THINK YOU'LL SEE-- YOU SEE
IN POLLING TODAY, THE VAST
MAJORITY OF AMERICANS WOULD LIKE
TO SEE HOW WE CAN IMPROVE UPON
THE LAW BUT NOT ENGAGE IN THESE
LEGAL MANEUVERINGS.
>> Ifill: SINCE IT'S VERY
CONFUSING FOR PEOPLE, YOU SAID
MOST AMERICAN WANT THIS LAW
ROLLED BACK AND YOU SAID MOST
WANT IT FIXED.
IS THERE A FIX?
IS THERE A COMMON GROUND?
>> I THINK WHAT AMERICAN PEOPLE
WANT IS HEALTH CARE THAT IS
BETTER AND MORE AFFORDABLE AND
MORE SECURE.
THE PROBLEM I THINK THE
CENTERPIECE OF THIS LAW,
GUARANTEED ISSUE OF COMMUNITY
RATING PROVISIONS OR PREEXISTING
PROVISIONS, MAKE HEALTH CARE
LESS SECURE FOR PEOPLE WE CARE
ABOUT THE MOST, WHICH IS THE
SICKEST AMERICANS.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT YOU CAN'T
MAKE HEALTH CARE MORE SECURE FOR
THEM UNTIL YOU GET RID OF THAT
CENTERPIECE OF THIS LAW SO I
THINK THE DEBATE GL FOR A LONG
TIME.
>> I JUST DISAGREE WITH THAT.
JUSTICE ROBERTS RECOGNIZED THIS.
YOU CAN HAVE PREEXISTING
CONDITIONS REQUIREMENTS, MAKING
SURE THAT PEOPLE NO LONGER
FACE-- YOU KNOW, FACE THE
SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN'T GET
HEALTH INSURANCE BECAUSE OF
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS.
YOU CAN DO THAT, BUT YOU HAVE TO
ENSURE THAT EVERYONE HAS HEALTH
INSURANCE.
JUSTICE ROBERTS ARTICULATED HOW
WE WORK TOGETHER, HOW ALL THESE
SECTION WORK TOGETHER, WHY THE
SUBDZ DEES WERE SO IMPORTANT TO
THAT AND THAT'S A CENTER PART OF
THIS DECISION AND THE LAW
ITSELF.
>> Ifill: I HAVE COST
QUESTIONS FOR YOU.
HEALTH CARE CONTINUES TO RISE
AND PREMIUMS CONTINUE TO GO.
FOR YOU, I WANT TO KNOW HOW DO
YOU SPEAK TO PEOPLE WHO FEEL
LIKE THIS LAW IS COSTING THEM
MORE IN AND IN YOUR CASE, HOW DO
YOU TELL PEOPLE WE'RE GOING TO
TAKE SOMETHING AWAY FROM YOU
THAT YOU'VE ALREADY HAD FOR A
COUPLE OF YEARS.
I'LL START WITH YOU.
>> CLEARLY THERE WILL BE
POLITICAL RESISTANCE TO THAT.
I THINK THE EASIEST WAY TO
REDUCE PREMIUMS FOR PEOPLE IS
GET RID OF THE PREEXISTING
CONDITIONS PROVISIONS AND OTHER
REGULATION NGHTZ A.C.A., THAT
INCREASE THE COST OF CARE.
>> Ifill: ISN'T THAT THE MOST
POPULAR PART OF THE A.C.A.?
>> YES.
>> ONLY IF YOU ASK ABOUT THE
BENEFITS.
IF YOU ASK PEOPLE ABOUT THE
COST, INCLUDING HOW IT ERHODES
THE QUALITY OF CARE FOR THE
SICKEST PEOPLE, THEN THE SUPPORT
FOR THAT FLIPS TO FIVE TO ONE
OPPOSITION.
>> Ifill: NEERA TANDEN.
>> ON THE ISSUE OF RISING COST,
WE HAVE A CHALLENGE WHICH IS
EMPLOYERS HAVE BEEN SHIFTING
COSTS TO EMPLOYEES.
THAT WAS BEFORE THE A.C.A.
THAT'S BEEN A LONG-TERM TREND,
DEDUCTIBLES ARE GOING UP, ET
CETERA.
IT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THE
A.C.A., AND IT'S HITTING PEOPLE
WHO HAVE NEVER BEEN IN THE
INSURANCE MARKET IN THE A.C.A.
ITSELF.
THAT'S A PROBLEM WE SHOULD DEAL
WITH AND WE SHOULD MAKE IT
CLEARER, MORE TRANSPARENT WHAT'S
HAPPENING.
I THINK IBELIEVE THAT QUESTION
WILL BE THE NEXT GENERATION OF
HEALTH CARE IDEAS, REFORMS,
DEBATES, AND THE PRESIDENTIAL
CONTEXT AND ELSEWHERE.
BECAUSE I THINK PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT THAT.
BUT I HOPE TANOW THAT WE'VE HAD
TWO SUPREME COURT CASES, 50
ATTEMPTS IN THE HOUSE, WE CAN
ACTUALLY MOVE ON TO A DEBATE
ABOUT HEALTH CARE COSTS AT
LARGE.
>> Ifill: NEERA TANDEN FOR
THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS, AND CANNON OF
THE CATO INSTITUTE, THANK YOU
BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Ifill: THE JUSTICES ALSO
RULED ON ANOTHER SIGNIFICANT
ASPECT OF AMERICAN LIFE, HOUSING
SEGREGATION.
AS WE MENTIONED EARLIER, A
CLOSELY-DIVIDED COURT FOUND THAT
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION, WHETHER
IT OCCURS BY ZONING OR HOME
SALES, DOES NOT HAVE TO BE
INTENTIONAL FOR PLAINTIFFS TO
SUE.
AGAIN, WE TURN TO MARCIA COYLE.
TAIL US ABOUT THAT CASE.
>> OKAY, THE FAIR HOUSING ACT OF
1968 MAKES IT ILLEGAL TO REFUSE
TO SELL OR RENT A HOUSE, AN
APARTMENT DWELLING WHEN THERE'S
BEEN A LEGITIMATE OFFER BECAUSE
OF SOMEONE'S RACE, NATIONAL
ORIGIN, COLOR.
IT'S BEEN CLEAR FOR A LONG TIME
THAT YOUAN C BRING INTENTIONAL
DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS UNDER THAT
ACT.
BUT INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION
IS VERY DIFFICULT TO PROVE IF,
GETTING TO SOMEBODY'S MOTIVE OR
MIND.
WHAT'S NOT BEEN SO CLEAR TO SOME
IS WHETHER YOU CAN BRING ANOTHER
KIND OF CLAIM, WHAT WE CALL A
DISPARITY IMPACT CLAIM.
>> Ifill: MY FIRST DEFINITION
I WANT.
EXPLAIN WHAT THAT IS.
>> THAT'S A CLAIM THAT SAYS A
POLICY OR DECISION THAT APPEARS
NEUTRAL ON ITS FACE HAS A
DISCRIMINATORY EFFECT ON
SOMEONE.
>> Ifill: GIVE ME AN EXAMPLE.
>> WELL, IN THIS CASE, ALL
RIGHT, THE CLAIM IS THAT THE
TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY AFFAIRS IS GIVING TAX
CREDITS, FEDERAL TAX CREDITS TO
DEVELOPERS TO DEVELOP LOW-INCOME
HOUSING, BUT IT'S GIVING MOST OF
THOSE TAX CREDITS TO DEVELOP
LOW-INCOME HOUSING IN
PREDOMINANTLY BLACK, LOW-INCOME
NEIGHBORHOODS, AND NOT TRYING TO
STEER MORE TAX CREDITS TO
DEVELOPMENT IN PREDOMINANTLY
WHITE, SUBURBAN NEIGHBORHOODS.
IS THE DEPARTMENT INTENTIONALLY
DISCRIMINATING?
WELL, AGAIN, THAT'S VERY
DIFFICULT TO PROVE.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT STATISTICS,
CHICAGO IS HOW YOU USUALLY PROVE
DISPARITY IMPACT CLAIMS, THEY'RE
SAYING WHAT THE TEXAS DEPARTMENT
IS DOING HAS A DISCRIMINATORY
EFFECT.
>> Ifill: JUSTICE KENNEDY WAS
A STRONG VOICE IN THIS CASE AS
WELL.
>> HE WROTE THE MAJORITY
OPINION.
IT REALLY TURNED ON TWO THINGS,
I THINK, FOR JUSTICE KENNEDY.
ONE, THERE WAS A LONG LINE OF
FEDERAL APPELLATE COURT RULINGS
FINDING THAT YOU COULD BRING A
DISPARATE IMPACT CLAIM UNDER
THIS FEDERAL HOUSING LAW.
AND SECONDLY N1988, SOME 20
YEARS AFTER CONGRESS ENACTED THE
LAW, CONGRESS AMENDED THE LAW.
AND AT THE TIME IT KNEW THAT
NINE FEDERAL APPELLATE COURTS
HAD SAID THAT YOU COULD BRING
THIS TYPE OF CLAIM, AND IT DID
NOTHING TO CHANGE THAT
UNDERSTANDING.
NOT ONLY DID IT DO NOTHING,
JUSTICE KENNEDY SAID, BUT IT
CREATED EXEMPTIONS FROM THAT
TYPE OF CLAIM.
>> Ifill: WE'RE GOING TO TALK
ABOUT THIS SOME MORE, BUT I ALSO
WANT TO ASK ON A BIG DAY LIKE
TODAY WHEN LONG-AWAITED CASES
COME DOWN, HOW DRAMATIC IS ITED
IN THAT CHAMBER?
>> YOU CAN FEEL A LOT OF PUBLIC
TENSION, EXCITEMENT.
IT WAS CROWDED.
THE PRESS-- THERE WAS OVERFLOW
IN THE PRESS SECTION--
>> Ifill: YOU DON'T KNOW
UNTIL IT COMES DOWN.
>> YOU DON'T KNOW WHICH DECISION
IT'S GOING TO BE.
HAD THEY STARTED WITH THE
HOUSING CASE, JUSTICE KENNEDY
READ-- THEY READ BY SENIORITY,
SO WE KNEW IT WAS GOING TO BE
SOMETHING IMPORTANT BECAUSE HE
HAS A LOT OF SENIORITY.
AND THEN IT GOES RIGHT TO THE
CHIEF JUSTICE, AND AGAIN WE KNEW
IT WAS GOING TO BE A BIG CASE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE WATCHING
FOR MORE DRAMAD FROM AND PERHAPS
MONDAY AS WELL.
>> PERHAPS MONDAY AS WELL.
>> Ifill: THANK YOU VERY
MUCH, MARCIA COYLE, AS WELL.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE REACTION ON
THIS SECOND BIG CASE, WE GO TO
HARI SREENIVASAN IN OUR NEW YORK
STUDIOS.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FOR A LOOK AT THE HOUSING ISSUES
THIS CASE ADDRESSES, AND WHICH
REMAIN UNRESOLVED, ARE RALPH
KASARDA OF THE PACIFIC LEGAL
FOUNDATION.
HE FILED AN AMICUS BRIEF IN THIS
CASE AND OLATI JOHNSON, A LAW
PROFESSOR AT COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
WHO HAS WORKED FOR THE NAACP
LEGAL DEFENSE FUND.
SO ILANA, I WANT TO START WITH
YOU, IT'S BEEN ILLEGAL TO
DISCRIMINATE UNDER THE FAIR
HOUSING ACT FOR THE LAST 45
YEARS.
WHY WAS TODAY IMPORTANT?
>> TODAY WAS IMPORTANT BECAUSE
THE SUPREME COURT MADE CLEAR
THAT PRACTICES THAT HAVE THE
PRACTICAL EFFECT OF EXCLUDING
GROUPS, EVEN WITHOUT A SHOWING
OF INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION,
HAD THE PRACTICAL EFFECT OF
EXCLUDING PEOPLE BASED ON AN
ARBITRARY CHARACTERISTIC, LIKE
RACE, JIRND, DISABILITY.
BUT THOSE ARE PROHIBITED BY THE
FAIR HOUSING ACT.
AS WAS MENTIONED BEFORE, THIS
HAS BEEN THE LAW AS IT'S BEEN
UNDERSTOOD FOR MORE THAN FOUR
DECADES, FROM THE LOWER COURTS
BUT IT'S STILL AN IMPORTANT
PRONOUNCEMENT FROM THE SUPREME
COURT AT A TIME WHEN THERE'S A
LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT HOUSING
DISCRIMINATION AND RESIDENTIAL
SEGREGATION IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT, RALPH
KASARDA, YOU SAID THIS LEADS TO
RACE-CONSCIOUS DECISION MAKING.
DID YOU FIND ANY CLARITY IN THE
OPINIONS THAT WERE WRITTEN AND
HANDED DOWN?
>> ACTUALLY, I DID FIND SOME
CLARITY, AND JUST TO REITERATE,
OUR OBJECTION TO DISPARATE
IMPACT IS THAT IT CAUSES-- IT
LEAD TO RACE-CONSCIOUS DECISION
MAKING, AND AS JUSTICE SCALIA
SAID IN ANOTHER DECISION, THAT
IT CAUSES DECISION MAKERS TO
HAVE THEIR TU THUMB ON THE RACIL
SCALES AND TO MAKE SURE THEIR
DECISIONS HAVE AN OUTCOME
COMEBASED ON SOME PREDETERMINED
RACIAL QUOTA, IN ORDER.
OTHER WORDS.
IN THIS DECISION, JUSTICE
KENNEDY RECOGNIZED THAT THERE IS
A CONSTITUTIONAL CONCERN HERE.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, NO JUSTICE
WANTED TO THAT.
ALL THE JUSTICES WOULD AGREE
THAT THERE IS A CONSTITUTIONAL
CONCERN.
AND TO ADDRESS THAT CONCERN,
JUSTICE KENNEDY IDENTIFIED,
REITERATED SOME SAFEGUARDS TO
ENSURE THAT DISPARATE IMPACT
CLAIMS COULD BE BROUGHT WITHOUT
FEAR OF CONSTITUTIONAL CONCERNS.
>> Sreenivasan: OLATI, I WANT
TO ASK, WHAT ABOUT THIS IDEA
THAT MOTIVE OR INTENT IS TAKEN
OUT OF THE EQUATION NOW AND
WE'RE JUST LOOKING AT EFFECT?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
TO EMPHASIZE, ESPECIALLY IN
LIGHT OF THE LAST COMMENTS, THAT
THIS HAS BEEN THE LAW.
IT'S BEEN UNDERSTOOD.
IT'S TRUE NORTH JUST IN THE FAIR
HOUSING ACT.
IT'S TRUE IN OTHER STATUTES.
DEALING WITH EMPLOYMENT, FOR
EXAMPLE.
I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
MISUNDERSTANDING OF DISPARATE
IMPACT.
A LOT OF TIMES PEOPLE THINK YOU
CAN JUST BRING A CLAIM THAT IT
HAS AN IMPACT ON A GROUP, AND
THAT'S ENOUGH FOR YOU TO WIN.
BUT FIRST FOR THOSE WHO ARE
STATISTICIANS IT'S IMPORTANT YOU
HAVE TO SHOW STATISTICALLY
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT.
BUT MORE THAN THAT, IF THE
POLICY IS JUSTIFIED, IF THE
POLICY IS ONE THAT A LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CAN SAY, "WE'RE DOING
THIS FOR HEALTH REASONS, FOR
SAFETY REASONS FOR TRAFFIC
REASONS" THEN IT'S GOING TO BE
OKAY UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING
PANTH WE CALL IT AN UNJUSTIFIED
DISPARATE IMPACT STANDARD AND
THAT'S WHY IT HASN'T BEEN
LEADING TO RAMPANT RACIAL QUOTE
EXPAZ CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTIONS
HAVEN'T BEEN AN ISSUE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: MR. KASARDA,
WILL THIS CHANGE HOW PERHAPS
BUSINESS GETS DONE?
>> IT MAY IN THAT THIS DECISION
TOUCHES ON HOUSING DECISIONS BY
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, ZONING
DECISIONDECISIONS.
IN ONE PREVIOUS CASE IT TOUCHED
ON EFFORTS BY A CITY TO ENFORCE
ITS HOUSING CODE.
IT DOESN'T TOUCH ON LENDERS, ON
INSURANCE COMPANIES, AND THOSE
ARARE GOVERNED-- THOSE ENTITIES
ARE GOVERNED UNDER THE FAIR
HOUSING ACT.
SO THIS MAY CAUSE CONCERN AMONG
THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY BY THE
FACT THAT IT WAS NOT ADDRESSED
IN THIS CASE, AND THEIR CONCERNS
WERE NOT ADDRESSED.
ASK THIS MAY LEAD TO FURTHER
LITIGATION AGAINST THOSE
ENTITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: MISS JOHNSON,
DOES THIS CHANGE ANY OF THE
UNDERLYING BEHAVIOR, OR PERHAPS
WHAT COULD BE STRUCTURAL
PATTERNS?
>> WELL, THE HOPE IS THAT IT
WILL.
I MEAN, IT'S PART OF INCREASING
EFFORTS TO DO MORE AROUND
ENFORCEMENT OF FAIR HOUSING.
SOME OF THIS IS LITIGATION DONE
BY PRIVATE ACTORS.
SOME OF IT HAS TO COME FROM THE
GOVERNMENT.
AN IMPORTANT PART OF THIS IS THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT HAS MADE RENEWED
EFFORTS TO IMPLEMENT DISPARATE
IMPACT AND OTHER PROVISIONS THE
FAIR HOUSING ACT THAT SAY YOU
HAVE TO AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER
FAIR HOUSING.
THE HOPE IS IT WOULD CHANGE
THINGS ON THE GROUND.
AND I JUST WANT TO MENTION HERE
THE PURPOSE OF THE FAIR HOUSING
ACT WAS TO ADDRESS GOVERNMENT
PRACTICES, AS WELL AS PRIVATE
PRACTICES.
AND THAT REQUIRES ADDRESSING,
SOMETIMES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT
PRACTICES.
AND KENNEDY REALLY REAFFIRMS
THIS ELEMENT OF THE FAIR HOUSING
ACT WHEN HE SAYS THAT QUESTIONS
LIKE DISCRIMINATORY ZONING, WHEN
YOU HAVE ZONING BARRIERS THAT
ARE NOT JUSTIFIED BY ANY OTHER
KIND OF POLICY, EVEN IF YOU
CAN'T SMOKE OUT DISCRIMINATION,
IF THEY HAVE A DISPARATE IMPACT,
THEY EXCLUDE PEOPLE BASED ON
FAMILY STATUS OR BASED ON RACE,
THAT'S NOT PROMOTING THE
INTEGRATIVE PURPOSES OF THE FAIR
HOUSING ACT.
SO THAT'S IMPORTANT, AND THE
HOPE IS THAT PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
ENFORCEMENT WILL CONTINUE TO
HAVE AN IMPACT ON THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: MR.ICA SARD
AREADING THE OPINION, WERE THERE
OTHER OPENINGS FOR FUTURE
CHALLENGES HERE, OR DO YOU SEE
THE POSSIBILITY THAT THIS COULD
BE INTERPRETED NARROWLY, JUST IN
THIS CASE?
>> I THINK THE OPPORTUNITY WOULD
BE ON A CASE-BY-CASE BASIS.
AND THAT IS WHETHER AN OUTCOME
DOES CREATE A CONSTITUTIONAL
PROBLEM, THAT DECISION WOULD
HAVE TO BE ATTACKED
INDIVIDUALLY.
IT'S PRETTY CLEAR THE FAIR
HOUSING ACT ENCOMPASSES CLAIMS
FOR DISPARATE IMPACT.
THAT ISSUE IS CLOSED.
SO IT WOULD BE ON CASE-BY-CASE
BASIS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT
RALPH KASARDA AND OLATI JOHNSON,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Ifill: NOW, HOW A COLLEGE
PREP PROGRAM HELPED TURN AROUND
A FAILING CITY SCHOOL, AND THE
LESSONS THAT MAY OFFER.
SINCE 1971, THE INTERNATIONAL
BACCALAUREATE PROGRAM HAS BEEN
USED IN BOTH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
SCHOOLS ACROSS THE NATION.
ONCE CONSIDERED SOLELY FOR THE
ELITE, THE TWO-YEAR CURRICULUM
IS CONSIDERED PART OF THE
PRESCRIPTION FOR IMPROVING HIGH
SCHOOL EDUCATION.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN HAS
THAT STORY FROM SEATTLE, PART OF
OUR AMERICAN GRADUATE SERIES, A
PUBLIC MEDIA INITIATIVE FUNDED
BY THE CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Reporter: FOR MANY SENIORS
LIKE DANNY SEGI AT SEATTLE'S
>> YOU'RE GOING TO LEARN
SOMETHING ABOUT A PROFESSION
WHERE IT WASN'T WHAT YOU
THOUGHT.
>> Reporter: FOR MANY SENIORS
LIKE DANNY SEGI AT SEATTLE'S
RAINIER BEACH HIGH-SCHOOL, THE
JOURNEY TOWARD GRADUATION HAS
BEEN A LONG ONE.
HE'S OVERCOME TOUGH ODDS AT A
SCHOOL IN ONE OF THE CITY'S MOST
VIOLENT NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO TELL ME WHAT IT WAS LIKE WHEN
YOU GOT HERE FOUR YEARS AGO?
WHAT WAS THE ATMOSPHERE?
>> SO IT WAS REALLY A WILD
ENVIRONMENT.
DEFINITELY NOBODY FOLLOWED THE
CHAIN OF COMMAND, STUDENTS
REALLY JUST HAD THEIR OWN WAY OF
GOING ABOUT THINGS, STUDENTS
JUST DISRESPECTING TEACHERS,
TALKING BACK TO TEACHERS, THERE
WAS NO SENSE OF RESPECT, YOU SEE
A LOT OF STUDENTS OVER HERE
DRINKING ALCOHOL, SMOKING WEED,
A LOT OF THEM SMOKED CIGARETTES
>> Reporter: DANNY ADMITS HE
INITIALLY RAN IN THAT CROWD AS
WELL, AND HE WASN'T ALONE.
IN 2011, ONLY ABOUT HALF OF
STUDENTS HERE WERE GRADUATING ON
TIME AND THE CITY WAS
THREATENING TO CLOSE THE SCHOOL.
TODAY, RAINIER BEACH IS
DRAMATICALLY DIFFERENT: NEARLY
80% OF STUDENTS ARE NOW
GRADUATING ON TIME AND
ENROLLMENT HAS NEARLY DOUBLED.
>> IT'S A BEAUTIFUL, BEAUTIFUL
AFTERNOON.
THANKS FOR SPENDING A COUPLE OF
HOURS WITH US
THIS TURNAROUND IS ATTRIBUTED TO
AN AMBITIOUS AND COSTLY PLAN
HATCHED BY PARENTS AND COMMUNITY
LEADERS: TO MAKE RAINIER BEACH
AN INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE
SCOOL HOFFERING A GLOBALLY
RECOGNIZED COLLEGE PREPARATORY
CURRICULUM.
THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE,
>> THE INTERNATIONAL
BACCALAUREATE IS INTERNATIONAL
EDUCATION.
THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE,
OR I.B., PROGRAM HAS BEEN AROUND
FOR MORE THAN 45 YEARS AND
EARLY-ON WAS VERY POPULAR FOR
THE CHILDREN OF DIPLOMATS.
>> THE CHILDREN OF THE AFFLUENT
YOU KNOW THE STUDENTS WHO WERE
EXPECTED TO BE LEADING WERE
GIVEN THIS EDUCATION WHERE THEY
ARE ALLOWED TO EXPLORE, THEY ARE
INDIVIDUAL THOUGHTS ARE VALUED
YOU KNOW THEY ARE TREATED AS IF
THE DECISIONS THEY MAKE ARE
INFORMED BY SOMETHING SPECIAL IN
THEM.
>> Reporter: COLIN PIERCE IS THE
I.B. COORDINATOR AT RAINIER
BEACH AND HELPED BRING THAT
ATTITUDE TOWARD LEARNING TO THE
SCHOOL DURING THE THREE-YEAR
CERTIFICATION PROCESS.
WITH A FEDERAL SCHOOL
IMPROVEMENT GRANT OF MORE THAN
$3.5 MILLION AND ADDITIONAL
STATE FUNDING, RAINIER BEACH
HIRED NEW STAFF AND RE-TRAINED
TEACHERS.
IT ALSO BEGAN OFFERING A MORE
RIGOROUS COURSE LOAD TO FOCUSING
HEAVILY ON CRITICAL THINKING AND
PROBLEM SOLVING TO DEVELOP YOUNG
ADULTS WHO CAN COMPETE AND
SUCCEED IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY.
BUT THE STAFF KNEW THIS
TURNAROUND PLAN WOULDN'T WORK
WITHOUT BUY-IN FROM STUDENTS.
>> IT'S REDEFINING HOW WE SET
AND SUPPORT OUR EXPECTATIONS AND
THERE IS A BELIEF ELEMENT OF IT.
THESE KIDS ARE SO SMART AND A
STUDENT CAN READ YOU IF YOU DO
NOT THINK THAT THEY CAN DO
SOMETHING THEY WILL PERFORM TO
YOUR EXPECTATIONS.
>> Reporter: EXPECTATIONS FOR
I.B. STUDENTS ARE HIGH, SIMILAR
TO THE MORE WELL-KNOWN, ADVANCED
PLACEMENT PROGRAM, AND IT ALSO
OFFERS AN OPPORTUNITY TO EARN
COLLEGE CREDIT.
IN ORDER TO EARN A FULL I.B.
DIPLOMA THEY MUST PASS TESTS IN
SIX SUBJECT AREAS INCLUDING
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE,
SCIENCE, MATH AND THE ARTS.
STUDENTS ARE ALSO REQUIRED TO
WRITE A 4,000 WORD RESEARCH
ESSAY, AND STUDY THE NATURE OF
KNOWLEDGE, HOW WE KNOW WHAT WE
CLAIM TO KNOW.
>> APPROACHING THE WORLD IN THE
WAY WE'VE BEEN APPROACHING IT,
IS THIS WORTH OUR TIME OR IS IT
A WASTE OF TIME?
>> Reporter: PURSUING A FULL
I.B. DIPLOMA USUALLY MEANS
SEVERAL HOURS OF HOMEWORK A
NIGHT AND RAINIER BEACH
PRINCIPAL DWANE CHAPPELLE
REALIZED THAT KIND OF COMMITMENT
AND FOCUS WASN'T REALISTIC FOR
MANY OF HIS 600 STUDENTS.
BUT HE WANTED AT LEAST PART OF
THE PROGRAM TO BE MANDATORY.
>> SOME STUDENTS WHO AT FIRST
WERE SAYING YOU KNOW THIS ISN'T
FOR KIDS OF COLOR, THESE ARE FOR
KNOW JUST HEARING THAT VOICE
RIGHT THERE FROM A KID A YOUNG
PERSON JUST BASICALLY MADE OUR
STAFF SAY YOU KNOW WHAT WE KNOW
THAT THEY CAN DO IT AND WE JUST
AND THAT'S WHERE WE ARE NOW
WHERE EVERY KID THAT IS A JUNIOR
OR SENIOR THEY HAVE TO TAKE AT
LEAST ONE I.B. CLASS.
>> Reporter: SINCE RAINIER BEACH
ADOPTED I.B., THE MAKE-UP OF THE
STUDENT BODY HASN'T CHANGED MUCH
ROUGHLY 95% ARE MINORITIES BUT
MANY SUBJECTS AT ARE DIFFERENT.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE OFFERINGS NOW
INCLUDE MANDARIN.
AND THERE IS MORE SKILL-BASED
INSTRUCTION TOO.
LIKE THIS CLASS THAT PARTNERS
WITH CISCO AND TEACHES STUDENTS
TO BUILD AND FIX COMPUTERS, CELL
PHONES AND OTHER MOBILE DEVICES.
>> NOT JUST MORE KNOWLEDGE BUT
HOW TO UNDERSTAND KNOWLEDGE.
>> Reporter: AT THE HEART OF THE
PROGRAM, THOUGH, IS AN AIM TO
HELP STUDENTS, LIKE JUNIOR IFRAH
ABSHIR WHO IS ON TRACK TO
COMPLETE THE FULL DIPLOMA,
RECOGNIZE THE WORLD BEYOND HIGH-
SCHOOL.
IFRAH PLANS TO BECOME A DOCTOR,
BUT THE CURRICULUM HAS SPARKED
ANOTHER INTEREST THAT SHE ALSO
>> SYRIA IS HAVING A CRISIS I
WOULD GO TO SYRIA AND I WILL
WORK WITH THEIR LIKE DOCTORS
WITHOUT BORDERS TYPE OF THING
BUT I ALSO LIKE A BIG PART OF ME
ALSO WANTS TO BE AN TIVACIST FOR
HUMAN RIGS LIHTKE BLACK LIVES
MATTER AND LIKE MUSLIMS LIVES
MATTER.
>> Reporter: IFRAH IS ONE OF TEN
KIDS FROM A FAMILY THAT
IMMIGRATED FROM SOMALIA.
HER MOTHER HAMDI BARRE, SAYS THE
PROGRAM HAS BEEN A BLESSING,
BOTH FOR THE FACT THAT IT IS
FREE BUT ALSO BECAUSE STUDENTS
BECOME MORE SERIOUS ABOUT THEIR
STUDIES.
STUDIES. >> (translated
): IFRAH IS MY
>> (translated): IFRAH
IS MY OLDEST DAUGHTER AND I'VE
ALWAYS
OLDEST DAUGHTER AND I'VE ALWAYS
ADVISED HER TO BECOME SOMEBODY
AND TO HELP OTHERS AND SHE
LISTENED, SHE'S A GOOD DAUGHTER
AND I HOPE SHE SUCCEEDS AND
REACHES HER DREAMS.
>> Reporter: WHILE IFRAH SEEMS
TO BE ON THE ROAD TO SUCCESS,
STEEP CHALLENGES REMAIN AT
RAINIER BEACH.
FUNDING FOR THE PROGR ONLAMY
GOES THROUGH 2017, AND THE COST
OF JUST ONE I.B. TEST ALONE IS
MORE THA$700, THOUGH RIGHT
NOW, THOSE FEES ARE COVERED BY
GRANTS.
AND SOME PARENTS, LIKE LACRETIA
CLAYTOR, WHO HELPED BRING THE
PROGRAM INTO THE SCHOOL HAVE
OTHER CONCERNS:
>> WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH AFRICAN
AMERICANS IN THE I.B. PROGRAM,
THE FULL I.B. PROGRAM.
CERTAINLY SOME ARE TAKING SOME
CLASSES AND YAY THANKFULLY THEY
ARE AT LEAST BRAVE ENOUGH TO
ATTEMPT YOU KNOW ONE OR TWO
CLASSES BUT THERE NEEDS TO BE A
LOT MORE.
WE NEED TO INCREASE THE LATINO
COMMUNITY, HISPANIC COMMUNITY,
THE PACIFIC ISLANDER COMMUNITY,
THE NATIVE COMMUNITY, WE NEED
THOSE NUMBERS TO INCREASE.
>> Reporter: OF THE 19 STUDENTS
WHO ORIGINALLY BEGAN WORKING
TOWARD A FULL I.B. DIPLOMA, ONLY
SEVEN WERE ON TRACK TO EARN ONE
ON GRADUATION DAY.
RESULTS WON'T BE KNOWN UNTIL
JULY, BUT I.B. COORDINATOR COLIN
PIERCE SAYS THAT ATTRITION RATE
IS TYPICAL FOR A FIRST COHORT,
AND HE SAYS 21 JUNIORS ARE
CURRENTLY ON TRACK TO COMPLETE
IT NEXT YEAR.
HE ADMITS THOUGH THESE CHANGES
HAVE NOT BEEN EASY.
>> ALL OF OUR STUDENTS HAVE
STRUGGLED WITH THIS.
OUR TEACHERS HAVE STRUGGLED WITH
THIS AND I THINK THAT'S PART OF
THE VALUE OF IT BECAUSE THEY ARE
NOT STRUGGLING ALONE, THEY ARE
STRUGGLING WITH A LOT OF
SUPPORT, THEY ARE STRUGGLING
WITH PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE THEY ARE
GOING TO MAKE IT TO THE OTHER
SIDE.
>> Reporter: ACROSS THE NATION,
THE I.B. PROAM IGRS NOW IN MORE
THAN 1,600 SCHOOLS.
MANY IN URBAN DISTRICTS.
RAINIER BEACH PURSUED I.B. AFTER
SEEING THE RESULTS OF A REPORT
THAT FOLLOWED GRADUATES AT 13
CHICAGO-AREA HIGH-SCHOOLS THAT
ADOPTED I.B.
A 2012 UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
STUDY FOUND STUDENTS WHO
COMPLETED THE DIPLOMA PROGRAM
THERE WERE 40% MORE LIKELY TO
ATTEND COLLEGE, AND WERE MORE
LIKELY TO STAY IN THEIR FIRST
TWO YEARS THERE.
WHILE RAINIER BEACH IS WORKING
TOWARD THOSE KINDS OF OUTCOMES
TOO, THE I.B. PROGRAM HAS
ALREADY DONE A LOT TO CHANGE THE
CULTURE AND REPUTATION OF THE
SCHOOL.
>> WE STARTED GETTING BETTER
BOOKS, BETTER TEXTBOOKS, HISTORY
BOOKS AND STUFF LIKE THAT AND
ACTUALLY FELT LIKE AN ACTUAL YOU
KNOW GOOD OUTSTANDING HIGH
SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: SENIOR DAJAUN ROSE
WAS BOTH STABBED AND SHOT IN HIS
FIRST TWO YEARS AT RAINIER
BEACH, BUT HE WAS ABLE TO STAY
ON TRACK THROUGH IT ALL AND
RECENTLY GRADUATED WITH HIS
SENIOR CLASS.
>> I JUST FEEL AMAZING.
I FEEL LIKE THERE IS NOTHING I
CAN'T OVERCOME.
>> Reporter: AS FOR DANNY SEGI,
HE EVENTUALLY PLANS TO GO TO A
UNIVERSITY IN NEW ZEALAND AND
HOPES TO ONE DAY BECOME A
TEACHER.
HE CREDITS BOTH PIERCE, AND THE
I.B. PROGRAM, FOR HELPING HIM
GET TO GRADUATION.
>> MR. PIERCE TOOK THAT
INITIATIVE AND REALLY TOLD US
YOU KNOW I COULD SEE YOU DOING
THIS, YOU KNOW THIS IS WHO YOU
ARE GOING TO BE YOU KNOW I SEE
YOU BEING THIS AND IT REALLY
JUST GAVE US MOTIVATION IF HE
>> Reporter: RAINIER BEACH IS
CURRENTLY ASKING THE STATE WILL
FOR AN ADDITIONAL $250,000 TO
KEEP THEROGR PAM GOING AND
PARENTS AND COMMUNITY LEADERS
HAVE ALSO STARTED A FOUNDATION
TO SUPPORT IT BEYOND 2017.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, IM APRIL
BROWN IN SEATTLE.
>> Ifill: ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN SPENDS
A LOT OF TIME TRYING TO EXPLAIN
AND ASSESS WHY MARKETS,
INDIVIDUALS, CONSUMERS, AND
BUSINESSES BEHAVE THE WAY THEY
DO.
BUT THERE'S A GROWING SCHOOL OF
THOUGHT THAT SAYS THE
TRADITIONAL ANSWERS TO THOSE
QUESTIONS MAY NOT BE THE CORRECT
ONES.
PAUL CAUGHT UP WITH ONE OF THE
LEADING THINKERS CHANGING THE
WAY WE LOOK AT ECONOMIC
BEHAVIOR, AS PART OF HIS SERIES
"MAKING SENSE," WHICH AIRS EVERY
THURSDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: MILLENNIUM PARK
RICHARD THALER, AN ACADEMIC
REVOLUTIONARY, WHO THINKS HIS
FIELD, ECONOMICS, HAS A WEIRDLY
DISTORTED VIEW OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
THAT WE'RE ALL RATIONAL
MAXIMIZERS, MATHEMATICAL
MACHINES, WHO USE OUR UNUSUALLY
BIG BRAINS TO WISELY CALCULATE
EVERY DECISION AS WE STRIVE TO
GET TO THE TOP, THUS CREATING
PERFECT MARKETS TO MAKE US
BETTER OFF.
YET, SAYS THALER--
>> AFTER THE '87 CRASH, WHEN THE
MARKET FELL 20% IN A DAY, AND
THE INTERNET BUBBLE, WHEN THE
NASDAQ WENT FROM 5,000 TO 1400,
AND THEN THE REAL ESTATE BUBBLE,
WHICH LED TO A FINANCIAL CRISIS
FROM WHICH WE'RE STILL TRYING TO
EXTRICATE OURSELVES, THE IDEA
THAT MARKETS WORK PERFECTLY IS
NO LONGER TENABLE.
>> Reporter: THALER IS RUNNING
HIS REVOLUTION FROM INSIDE THE
BELLY OF THE BEAST-- THE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, WHICH
BOASTS 28 NOBEL LAUREATES
PRACTICED IN TRADITIONAL
ECONOMICS.
COLLECTIVELY, THEY'VE CREATED
WHAT'S KNOWN AS THE "CHICAGO
SCHOOL," PRED PREDICATED ON THE
PERFECT EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS,
IN WHICH PRICES RATIONALLY
REFLECT ALL AVAILABLE
INFORMATION.
BUT AT A LUNCH WITH STAR
STUDENTS, THALER OFFERED HIS
LATEST FAVORITE EXAMPLE OF
MARKETS BEHAIFG BADLY.
-- BEHAVING BADLY.
A CLOSED END STOCK FUND CALLED
THE HERZFELLED CARIBBEAN BASIN
FUND--
>> TICKER SYMBOL C.U.B.A.
NOW, NEEDLESS TO SAY, IT CANNOT
AND DOES NOT INVEST IN CUBA.
THAT'S AGAINST THE LAW.
( LAUGHTER )
AND THERE WOULDN'T BE ANYTHING
TO BUY, ANYWAY.
THERE ARE NO TRADED SECURITIES
IN CUBA.
>> Reporter: NOW, TYPICALLY,
THE SHARES OF CLOSED END FUNDS,
WHICH SIMPLY OWN A BASKET OF
STOCKS, SHOULDN'T BE WORTH MORE
THAN THE STOCKS THEMSELVES.
OTHERWISE, YOU COULD SAVE MONEY
BY JUST BUYING THE STOCKS
YOURSELF.
>> NEVERTHELESS, THE DAY THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE AN
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT RELATIONSHIPS
WITH CUBA WOULD BE EASED TTHIS,S
FUND SHOT TO A 70% PREMIUM AND
IS NOW SELLING AT ABOUT A 40%
PREMIUM.
>> Reporter: NOW, TO BE FAIR,
THE FUND DOES INVEST IN FIRMS
LIKELY TO BENEFIT FROM ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT
CARIBBEAN, INCLUDING CUBA, BUT
THAT DOESN'T EXPLAIN WHY SHAIRMS
OF THE FUND ARE NOW WORTH A
WHOPPING $140 FOR EVERY $100
WORTH OF ACTUAL STOCKS IN THE
FUND.
>> CUBA-- GOOD.
ICEPR GOES UP.
WOULD YOU SAY THAT'S CONSISTENT
WITH A RATIONAL, EFFICIENT
MARKET?
>> Reporter: THALER STARTED
NOTICING SUCH MARKET ANOMALIES
EARLY IN HIS CAREER AS AN
ECONOMIST.
>> WANT MARKET WOULD BE UP IN
JANUARY, UP ON FRIDAYS, DOWN ON
MONDAYS, IT WOULD GO UP ON THE
DAYS BEFORE HOLIDAYS.
NONE OF THIS MADE ANY SENSE.
>> Reporter: SO HE BEGAN
CHALLENGING ECONOMIC ORTHOXY.OD
TODAY HIS VERSION OF ECONOMICS,
BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS, HAS
FINALLY TAKEN HOLD PAIN STORY
THAT HE TELLS IN HIS NEW BOOK
"MISBEHAVING."
I
T'S A HIT, EVEN HERE IN
ORTHODOX CHICAGO, WHERE THE
BOOK'S VERY PRICE IS AN EXAMPLE
OF ECONOMIC IRRATIONALITY.
>> MY BOOK IS 30% OFF, AND
PEOPLE LOVE DEALS.
THEY CAN BE DRIVEN TO PURCHASE
THINGS THAT THEY DON'T
REALLIMENT.
IF THE DEAL IS GOOD ENOUGH.
>> Reporter: BY CONTRAST,
CHICAGO SCHOOL ECONOMISTS LONG
ARGUED THAT IF SOMEONE CHOOSES
TO BUY THALER'S BOOK, SAY, OR
ANYTHING ELSE, THAT'S PROOF
ENOUGH THAT THEY WANT IT AT THE
PRICE BEING PAID.
DEAL OR NO DEAL.
ALL HUMAN BEHAVIOR, SAYS
THALE,s WRAS REDUCED TO
SIMILAR ABSURDITYS.
USUALLY, ACCOMPANIED BY
MATHEMATICAL EQUATIONS.
>> MARRY THE OPTIMAL WIFE.
GET DIVORCED WHEN THE UTILITY OF
BEING MARRIED TURNED NEGATIVE.
>> Reporter: BUT IT WAS ONLY
WHEN THALER BEGAN DOING
EXPERIMENTS AND PUBLISHED THEM
THE DOCTRINAIRE ECONOMISTS, WHO
HE CALLS E-CONS, BEGAN TO ADMIT
SOME OF THE ERROR OF THEIR WAYS.
TAKE THE CONCEPT OF SUNK COSTS
-- TIME AND MONEY ALREADY SPENT.
AN E-CONASSUMES EVERYONE KNOWS
WHEN TO QUIT, CUT THEIR LOSSES,
MOVE ON.
THIS GROUP OF CAMEROONIAN
STUDENTS AT FIRST SEEMED TO GET
THAT.
>> LET'S SUPPOSE YOU BOUGHT
TICKETS TO GO TO A CONCERT OVER
HERE AT THIS BANDSHELL.
40 BUCKS EACH.
THE GROUP IS OKAY BUT THEN IT
STARTS TO RAIN.
HOW LONG DO YOU THINK YOU'RE
GOING TO STICK AROUND THIS
CONCERT?
>> NOT MUCH.
>> NOT MUCH?
>> Reporter: WHAT IF THE SUNK
COSTS SUDDENLY SWELL.
>> HOW MANY OF YOU WOULD HAVE A
DIFFERENT DECISION ABOUT STAYING
OR LEAVE LEAVING, IF IT WAS $500
AS OPPOSED TO $40.
EVERY SINGLE ONE OF YOU.
>> I HAVE TO MAKE MY MONEY WORTH
IT.
>> Reporter: YOU HAVE TO MAKE
YOUR MONEY WORTH IT.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter:AND YOUR POINT
HERE?
>> WELL, ECONOMISTS WOULD SAY
HOW MUCH YOU PAID FOR THE
TICKET, TOUGH LUCK.
IF IT'S $40 OR $500--
>> DOESN'T MATTER.
>> YOU SHOULD JUST DECIDE
WHETHER THE MUSIC IS WORTH THE
ANNOYANCE OF THE RAIN.
>> Reporter: THEN THERE'S THE
WAY MOST PEOPLE VALUE THEIR
TIME.
AS WHEN RILEY GAUNT IS SHOPPING
FOR A $40 PAIR OF SHOES LEARNS
THEY'RE ON SALE FOR 30--
>> BUT IT'S ANOTHER STORE
10-MINUTE DRIVE AWAY.
>> OKAY.
>> WOULD YOU GO?
>> PROBABLY.
>> OKAY.
>> Reporter: BUT WHAT IF SHE'S
SHOPPING FOR A $200 DRESS THAT
SHE LEARNS ANOTHER STORE IS
SELLING FOR $190.
>> DO YOU THINK YOU'D GO?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: BUT YOU SEE THE
POINT, RIGHT?
IF 10 MINUTES IS WOTHR $10 TO
YOU, IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW
YOU'RE SAVING THE $10, NO?
>> YEAH, THAT MAKES SENSE.
>> Reporter: NOW THAT YOU'VE
HEARD THIS EXPLANATION, WOULD
YOU CHANGE YOUR ANSWER?
>> NO, PROBE NOT.
>> SO, CHARLIE--
>> HER BOYFRIEND, CHARLIE ELLIS,
HAD HIS OWN DISTINCTLY NON-E-CON
APPROACH TO PERSONAL FINANCE.
>> ARE YOU PUMPED ABOUT THE
FINALS?
>> I'M SO PUMPED.
I'M READY.
>> Reporter: WE TAKE THIS ON
THE EVE OF THE STANLEY CUP
FINALS, EVENTUALLY WON BY THE
CHICAGO BLACK HAWKS.
>> SUPPOSE I TOLD YOU I HAVE TWO
TICKETS TO THE FIRST HOME GAME
ABOUT 10 ROSE BEHIND THE PENALTY
BOX.
>> I WOULD BE SO EXCITED.
>> NOW LET'S SUPPOSE I GAVE YOU
THOSE TWO TICKETS.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH WOULD HE
DEMAND TO SELL THOSE TICKETS?
>> PHEW, MAN, MAYBE $500, IF I
COULD GET THAT.
>> 500 EACH.
>> A POP, YEAH.
>> Reporter:AND HOW MUCH WOULD
HE PAY IF HE HAD TO BUY THE
TICKETS?
>> MAYBE $200.
>> OKAY SO, ABOUT HALF.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: NOW AN E-CON
WOULD SAY THE PRICE TO BUY OR
SELL SHOULD BE ABOUT THE SAME,
BUT NOT A HUMAN, AND NOT OUR
CAMERAMAN, A DIEHARD BLACK HAWKS
FAN HIMSELF WHO HEARD THE ENTIRE
PREVIOUS EXCHANGE AND THEN GAVE
EXOOCTLY THE SAME ANSWERS.
>> I WOULD NOT PAY AS MUCH AS
I'M GOING TO SELL IT FOR.
>> Reporter: AND THIS IS AFTER
HE HEARD YOU DO THIS ALREADY.
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, TEACHING THE
PRINCIPLES DOESN'T MAKE PEOPLE
DO IT.
>> Reporter: AFTER NEARLY FOUR
DECADES OF TRYING TO PROVE JUST
HOW CRAZY ECONOMICS CAN BE,
RICHARD THALER IS NOW RUNNING
THE ASYLUM AS PRESIDENT OF THE
AMERICAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION.
HIS BEHAVIORAL ECONOMIC THEORIES
HAVE BEEN PUT INTO PRACTICE BY
GOVERNMENTS AROUND THE WORLD,
INCLUDING OURS, IN SO-CALLED
"NUDGE UNITS," BASED ON HIS
PREVIOUS BESTSALER.
NOT BAD FOR A GUY WHO THOUGHT
HE'D NEVER GET TENURE FOR SUCH
UNCONVENTIONAL WORK.
AND HOW DOES HE NOW FEEL ABOUT
BEING CALLED THE INVENTOR OF
BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS?
>> ONE GUY CAN'T CREATE A FIELD,
BUT YOU CAN GET PEOPLE THINKING.
>> Reporter: AND SO HE HAS.
THIS IS PAUL SOLMAN REPORTING
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR FROM
EVER-MORE-SENSIBLE AND
UNORTHODOX, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS.
>> Ifill: WE END WITH ANOTHER
LOOK AT "BRIEF BUT SPECTACULAR,"
OUR SERIES OF INTERVIEWS
FEATURING PERSONAL INSIGHTS FROM
ARTISTS, AUTHORS, LEADERS, AND
THINKERS, TELLING US, BRIEFLY,
WHAT THEY ARE PASSIONATE ABOUT.
TODAY PRODUCER STEVE GOLDBLOOM
HEARS FROM THE CREATORS OF THE
COMEDY CENTRAL HIT SHOW "BROAD
CITY."
ABBI JACOBSON AND ILANA GLAZER
EXPLAIN HOW YOUTUBE AND THE
IMPROVISATIONAL GROUP "UPRIGHT
CITIZENS BRIGADE" SHAPED THEIR
SUCCESS.
>> SO WE WERE ON THIS IMPROV
TEAM FOR, LIKE, TWO YEARS.
>> IT'S FUNNY TO LOSE MONEY ON
IMPROVE.
>> WE LOST MONEY.
THE "BROAD CITY" STORIES CAME
BECAUSE WE WERE STRUGGLING TO
GET MORE RECOGNITION MORE, LIKE,
STAGE TIME AT U.C.B., AND WERE
NOT ABLE TO.
>> WE JUST WANTED TO SEND A LINK
ON OUR PARENTS OF WHAT IT IS
WE'RE SPENDING ALL THIS TIME ON.
>> WE KIND OF THINK OF IT AS
GRAD SCHOOL.
>> ABBI CAME UP WITH THE NAME
BROAD CITY.
YOU DID.
I'M LIKE, COME OCOME AT ME.
AND SHE'S LISTING NAMES--
>> YEAH, WE WERE COMING UP WITH
A NAME.
>> WE WERE LIKE "GIRL CITY."
"BROADVILLE."
IT WAS LIKE "BROAD CITY," AND WE
WERE LIKE THAT'S IT.
THIS IS "BROAD CITY."
>> WE DID THE WEB STORIES FOR
TWO YEARS BEFORE HE PITCHED IT
AS A TV SHOW.
>> JUST FAIR LONG TIME IT WAS,
LIKE, 2,000, 2500 PEOPLE.
>> WE FELT LIKE IT WAS THE SAME
PEOPLE.
>> IT WAS--
>> WE SHOULD INVITE ALL THOSE
PEOPLE TO A PARTY OR SOMETHING.
AND WE DECIDED THAT WE WERE
GOING TO WRITE A EXPIELT GO TO
L.A. AND PITCH THIS AS A TV SHOW
PURPOSE WE WERE GOING TO DO OUR
LAST WEB EPISODE AND WE NEVER
REALLY HAD ANY CELEBRITIES AND
THROUGH A FRIEND, SHE WAS LIKE,
"WHAT ABOUT AMY POEHLER.
AND I WAS LIKE OH, MY GOD.
SHE RUNS U.C.B., WHICH WE CAME
OUT OF, WOULD SHE EVER DO THIS?
>> SHE DID.
SHE WANTED TO BE IN AN EPISODE.
I QUICK MY JOB.
>> YEAH, ILANA QUIT HER JOB.
AND THEN HAD WE SHOT WITH HER WE
JUST HIT IT OFF.
WE HELD OUR BREATHS AND ASKED
HER IN THAT E-MAIL, "HEY, THIS
IS THE EPISODE.
WE LOVE IT.
WOULD YOU EVER CONSIDER BEING AN
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER?
WE'RE PLANNING ON GOING TO PITCH
THIS?"
AND SHE WROTE BACK THE NEXTAY, D
AND SHE WAS JUST LIKE, "I WOULD
LOVE TO.
I DIDN'T WANT TO STEP ON ANY
TOES."
>> I HAVE CHILLS.
>> AND WE WERE LIKE, "WHAT TOES
WILL?"
>> AND ALSO WHEN YOU CALLED ME,
WE'RE LIKE AAAH!
WE CALL OUR PARENTS OUR PARENTS
ARE LIKE AAAH.
WE CALLED EACH OTHER BACK AND
WE'RE, LIKE, PANTING.
>> WE'RE LIKE OUR PARENTS DIED,
I GO NOT UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU
WERE SAYING.
>> LIKE--
>> YEAH, YEAH, YEAH.
>> WE ACTED AS EVERY POTENTIAL
HAD IN THE WEB SERIES BUT ON
THIS TINY SCALE.
WE WERE THE LINE PRODUCERS, AND
NOW HAVING THOSE PEOPLE IS--
IT'S SUCH A PRIVILEGE.
THE RESPONSE HAS BEEN SO BEYOND,
SO SURREAL AND INCREDIBLE.
WE DEFINITELY HAVE BEEN MORE IN
OUR HEADS THAN EVER BEFORE.
>> THERE IS, WITHOUT A DOUBT, A
PRESSURE OF WE HAVE TO KEEP
THUP.
THE FACT THAT NEW YORK IS SUCH A
BIG PART OF THE SHOW, HAVING THE
CONFIDENCE IN THE CHARACTERS TO
LEAVE NEW YORK IS SOMETHING THAT
I THINK WE ARE FIGURING OUT IN
THE THIRD SEASON.
>> WHERE IS "BROAD CITY"?
NEW YORK CITY IS ITS OWN CITY
AND "BROAD CITY" IS ITS OWN
CITY.
WHAT IS THAT INSPECT.
MY NAME IS GLAZE.
>> AND MY NAME IS ABBI JACOBSON.
>> AND THIS IS OUR BRIEF AND
SPECTACULAR TAKE ON--
>> OUR TELEVISION SHOW "BROAD
CITY."
>> Ifill: GET A FIRST LOOK AT
OUR SERIES "BRIEF BUT
SPECTACULAR" EVERY THURSDAY ON
THE PBS NEWSHOUR PAGE ON
FACEBOOK.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE, IT'S A
GO-TO DISH ON MANY A SUSHI MENU,
BUT WE'RE ABOUT TO MAKE YOU
THINK TWICE ABOUT SPICY TUNA
ROLLS.
IT TURNS OUT, ONE OF THE ROLL'S
SCRAPED FROM THE BONE OF THE
FISH HAS BEEN LINKED TO HUNDREDS
OF ILLNESSES IN THE U.S.
HEAR ALL ABOUT IT ON
"SHORTWAVE," THE NEWSHOUR
PODCAST.
FIND OUT HOW TO LISTEN, ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
TUNE IN LATER THIS EVENING ON
CHARLIE ROSE, GET MORE ANALYSIS
AND REACTION TO THE SUPREME
COURT'S RULING ON THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
DELIVERS THE EULOGY AT THE
FUNERAL OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA
PASTOR AND STATE SENATOR
KILLED IN THE CHURCH SHOOTING.
I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.